you saying the squirrel is resistant to
diabetes so at the at the beginning of
the hibernation period they increase
their body mass by over 100% And they
become completely insulin resistant so
it's a naturally reversible model of
diabetes essentially that's
[Music]
insane this is Star Talk special edition
and since it's special edition you know
my two co-hosts Chuck Nice Chuck how you
doing man hey Neil I'm doing great
thanks not only Chuck we've got Gary
O'Reilly all right Gary welcome back
thank you always a pleasure today's
topic is like whoa how come we didn't do
this 10 years ago we're gonna talk about
hibernation in space Oh don't sleep on
this subject
oh came in early I want me some
hibernation stories here so Gary set the
scene here what did you put together
we've all seen the Sci-Fi movies where
the crew are in some kind of deep sleep
hurtling through deep space um but how
is that going to be achieved turns out
we actually may have to look to Mother L
Nature for our answer animals can
hibernate for months at a time from
little squirrels to big old Bears so if
humans want to engage in interplanetary
travel they are most likely going to
need to hide hibernate or enter a state
of
torper can you get a non-hibernating
animal which is US humans to hibernate
and for that we are going to need an
expert um QE Our Guest Ryan spranger PhD
senior research physiologist at fora bio
a PhD in Zoology with expertise in
cardio pulmonary physiology also
expertise in hibernation and extreme
physiology which I think is a vital
component of his background and its
effects on the cardiovascular system
fora bio have been awarded a NASA Grant
through their niac program which stands
for NASA Innovative advanced concepts
for a study in torper in animals for
space health or stash plus the most
important thing is Ryan is a startup fan
which makes him smart as well as cool we
we love it Ryan welcome two star talk
thank you so much for having me I'm
excited to be here so what is
torper that's a good question what is
torper so so we Define torper in the
field as a state of metabolic depression
and body temperature depression and so
it's sort of this quiescent state where
the body's been turned down wait so
depression in a biophysiological sense
not in a neurological sense a little bit
a biophysiological sense that in its
root but you also have a
neurophysiological depression but not a
depressive State as in an
emotional that's all I mean yeah got so
so so a dialing down of the metabolism
and the body temperature essentially the
body torper so what's the difference
between torper and and hibernation uh
this is a this is a fun topic to to
discuss at the hibernation conferences
that we hold every four years but uh
what the general field will say is
hibernation is the season in which the
animals will use torper and so torper is
the actual state in which the metabolism
is low why do you have conferences only
every four years are you hibernating in
between yeah yeah precisely precisely
well that's when good science gets done
as well well historically it it's taken
longer to collect hibernation data
because it's a SE it's it's a seasonal
uh event yeah you only have a very
limited window where you can study yeah
you can't go can't go up to a bear in
the summertime just like hey man you
tired TI you need tired
you've got you've got two H where Winter
is one time and in one and and a
different another so you might I mean
depends if you feel like picking up your
bags and traveling yeah well actually
and that's why it was just this year we
decided to shorten that as a community
we decided to shorten that conference
because we're learning that hibernation
is not just a cold season event we're
learning recently that warm animals will
hibernate uh animals in warm climates
will hibernate they'll hibernate at warm
temperatures um so we're learning that
that it's more widespread than we
thought why why do they do it what I
mean what is what is the purpose of
hibernation for like if I'm a bear right
we we all think of hibernation we
automatically think of bears so I use
them as an example but why not just be
awake all year long and you know go get
some food when and or pack up on uh you
know calories like some other animals do
and then get through the lean time
what's the idea of you know dialing
yourself down metabolically and taking a
long nap you mentioned it almost in your
question it it it costs a lot to do
things is is a really simple way of
putting it energetically energetically
it costs a lot energetically to do I'm
not thinking the bear has got need $20
in his wallet to
get very cly to be a
bear only you can prevent forest fires
come on help a brother
out SP
change um yeah energetically it costs a
lot and and so even if you wanted to
pack on all that extra weight and try to
make it through a period of what we like
to term resource deprivation so this is
a period where there's not as much water
available it's frozen or it's a drought
um and there's not a lot of food
available because of that reason and so
in these periods of resource debation
some mammals have decided uh over time
to to instead of increasing Supply they
decrease demand and that Demand Being
your your metabolism that they're
turning down oh my that's that that's
scary scares me in a way just because I
think about the climate and how it's
changing and when you talk about matters
of deprivation you know or lack of
resources you know we might find a a a
time where maybe those Bears won't
hibernate because the water won't be
Frozen and then we've encroached upon
their land and they they're like hey you
guys you guys are supplying us with food
like because you ever you ever see the
videos of them tearing open a car to get
to get to that picnic basket you know
it's a little scary what you when you
describe hibernation that way for those
reasons yeah well bears are very strong
atom that is that goes without saying
but um yeah climate change actually
that's a big push in the field right now
is to try to understand what climate
change is going to do to hibernators
particularly the cold climate
hibernators because again we we're
seeing more and more warm climate
hibernators so we have an idea of what
it might look like but it is very
different so it's going to be a big
change for a lot of these a lot of these
species there has to be some
positive benefit to hibernation
otherwise animals would have evolved not
to do it most mammals don't do it what
are the benefits then to mean AP from
getting a good
nap it would be the dream if you could
um yeah the the benefit as far as we can
tell is these these animals that use it
are more resilient to periods in which
there suddenly isn't availability of
resources gotcha and so a really great
example of this actually is not in the
northern hemispheres where it's cold
it's the southern hemispheres in
Australia where you have Wildfire big
wildfires and there's animals down there
that after these periods of wildfire
where there's now suddenly no food for a
while they'll go into torper and so
these animals are more resilient now
because they they don't need that food
and they can survive a little bit longer
can just kind of stretch what resources
they currently have in their body and
cold blooded animals barely eat anyway
right I mean we always show alligators
as being voracious eaters but
yeah I mean we eat a lot because we have
to maintain our body temperature apart
from the air temperature surrounding us
if they are the air temperature then
their their energy is for what to run
their brain and if they want to just
walk around a little bit exactly so yeah
and so you're exactly right the cold
blooded animals they don't eat a lot um
they can go white long periods
alligators I think can go months to
almost a year without eating yeah oh my
God and I've got a funny anecdote about
that from my old advisor but there's
nothing funny about a hungry alligator I
was about to say that no not at
all um not when you're around it at
least yeah that's right but yeah they
they don't eat for for long periods of
time because they don't have to defend
body temperature so defending body
temperature at a stable uh amount is
very it costs a lot of energy so we're
we're expending energy all the time just
to keep our body temperature at 98.6 is
what you're saying that's that's where
all so if you don't have that I'll call
it a problem but if if that's not
necessary then you're saving a lot of
energy you barely have to eat it all run
you barely have to doat it all yeah in
fact it's it's it's worse than that or
better than that you burn energy
thermally just by maintaining your body
temperature but you also burn energy
kinetically right by like moving Against
Gravity or just moving at all
okay
consider how long it would take your
body to burn the calories of a cupcake
just by existing you will easily burn
the calories of a cupcake just by
watching television you can do that okay
right but then say what do I have to do
on a treadmill to burn the calories of a
cupcake it's like I'm not doing that
right yeah that's that's damn near an
hour running yeah exactly exactly
thermal energy is a huge consumer of
energy relative to kinetic energy but
Ryan get back to your to your answer
there if they're wildfires and they take
out
resources you have to wait until the
trees grow back and the bushes grow back
it seems to me that would require a much
longer time than a typical hibernating
bear for the resources to return if they
have to recover from a wildfire yeah I
well I would I would describe it more of
a strategy to stretch how long you can
maintain in that area okay and so if you
stay if you stay active you've got days
right if you stay torpid you've got
months and they can stay in torp I mean
there's animals that again these are in
the northern hemispheres but there's
animals that can stay torped for 9
months of the year oh and so it's it's
quite a while and your your your primary
growth or your secondary growth I should
say your primary growth sorry that your
first Shrubbery where you can start to
get things to eat like insects and and
and berries if they're if they're coming
up in the in those months um you could
stretch yourself to get to get to those
I would say yeah okay so what does NASA
want out of you here and and for Bio is
that a company you started what is FAA
bio yeah FAA bio is not a company I
started was started by three really
intelligent ladies um Katie uh Linda and
Ashley I've never heard anyone say my
company was started by three stupid
people okay so that's a good point
that's a good point I just like to give
them credit when it's due they're
they're really incredible incredible uh
human beings the company is based on the
premise that a lot a lot of drug
development could be benefited by
looking at animals that have extreme
physiology or or rather looking at
animals that are good at defending
against diseases that humans are
afflicted with naturally and so one of
the models that we use quite regularly
is a hibernating species called a 13
line ground squirrel and that species is
fantastic against things like diabetes
um esia reperfusion for example so this
is after traumatic injury loss of blood
flow loss of oxygen you return that you
get tissue damage wait you saying the
squirrel is resistant to diabetes so at
the at the beginning of the hibernation
period or or before they start their
hibernation season they increase their
body mass by over 100% just at aost
tissue so let's say they weigh 100 grams
they'll go to 250 grams they've added
150 grams of just fat and they become
completely insulin resistant during that
period and by the time the end of the
hibernation season comes around they
reverse that insulin resistance and
they're back to noral wow it's a
naturally reversible model of diabetes
essentially that's insane yes yes so I
mean why isn't everybody studying I mean
diabetes is a huge huge problem in this
country huge so so so if if we know we
mammals are a branch of the tree of life
and so we have more in common with each
other than either of us have with any
other branch in the Tree of Life why
can't we just genetically
steal these DNA secrets in these animals
and then apply it to us for
however we need and is that what NASA is
trying to get you to do for our future
astronauts yes yes that that is that is
what Fawn is trying to do using these
extreme organism and and and hibernators
aren't the only species that are
extraordinary there's a spiny Mouse for
example that has regetta of capabilities
so this is a m that can spiny Mouse M
yes spiny spiny mouse that what are the
regen what are the regenerative
capabilities you know per we grow a tail
or a leg right uh I don't know about a
whole limb but certainly tissue
replacement um so so neural tissue
replacement skin like normal tissue
Replacements or skin is there not a
chance for any mamal that hibernates for
any length of time losing muscle density
this is another remarkable uh aspect of
the hibernating species that have been
studied to dat they don't so
so this is incredible this is and this
is where NASA is interested this is
where we get into NASA yeah so so if you
break your arm if you break your arm
you're like you go into a cast for
however many months that you have it you
take it off your arms are different
sizes you've lost muscle mass that's
that's disuse atrophy is what I'm old
enough to remember the old days where
you were encouraged to not use the limb
at all there were no walking casts there
was no exercises you would do and I say
I had friends who broke broke Limbs and
they took off the cast it was like the
the limbs of two different people on the
same body yeah yeah and and hibernators
don't do that it's incredible wow yeah
but you always see in the nature shows
where the animal comes out of
hibernation and then sir what's his name
I forget and he's just like and now the
feverish search for food begins like
they
immediately dare you forget David aten's
name that's his name sir David
attenburrow yes exactly's a Brit we're
allowed to forget a well no he's beloved
everywhere he's not even like the whole
world owns that guy that's why I
couldn't remember his name because
everybody know so you're saying that the
weight loss is not muscle density it's
correct so they put on fat and then all
they do is their body eats the fat yep
oh because our body eats muscle for
muscle first yeah our body eat muscle
first Ryan why don't you fix us actually
we we just FAA just signed a really
awesome partnership with Eli Lily trying
to fix that yes we're doing that we're
actively looking at that actually we're
looking for new obesity targets to try
to see how it is that we can cha we can
say have our metabolism say yet we want
to just consume adapost we don't want to
consume protein we don't want to consume
carbohydrates you want to have your
metabolism and eat it too exactly yeah
that's what we want to do yeah Ryan in
in our research we came across a nugget
of information that is worrying and
amazing in the same breath how did we
find out that hibernating animals have a
level of protection from radiation yeah
this started in the early 50s I think 51
was the first study that looked at
irradiating hibernators and so they
basically gave them huge doses of gamma
radiation and what they learned was that
these hyting species survived the
radiation far better than a rat for
example and it particularly incre their
their protection against the radiation
increased if they were in corper and so
so these species are uniquely protected
against radiation the study started in
the early 50s we still have not a great
idea why it's not because the fat
absorbs the gamas is it no we think it
has to do with reactive oxygen species
please explain that what that is yeah
reactive oxygen species are well I guess
I'm not a chemist so I couldn't tell you
exactly what a reactive oxygen species
is but it's a product of your metabolism
and so these these reactive oxygen
species they as as the term suggests
they react with they cause all sorts of
bad stuff to happen in your tissue
damage tissue damage essentially and so
when when radiation comes in and hits a
hydrogen so like a proton comes and it
gets a hydrogen or uh interacts with
oxygen it creates these reactive oxygen
species that damage your body and so if
you've ever been to the store and
everybody the phrase right now is
antioxidants if you've seen that in the
store in your food that's that's they're
designed to counteract reactive oxygen
species sort of I'm not anti anything by
the way that's fair um and so so that's
where we think a lot of the protection
is coming from is because these animals
are really good at natural antioxidants
so they have them uh during the torpid
state but also with the with the
reduction of metabolism you get a
reduction of the mitochondrial function
you get less oxygen uh in these tissues
as well as less water so there's less
things for that radiation to interact
with and create these reactive oxygen
species so so less things you mean
there's less active biology to disrupt
is that a way to say that yeah and do
the animals come out of hibernation
after being uh radiated with gamma rays
going like bear smash or
what no no bear doesn't have to become
do not want anyone to fire gamas at a
bloody bear do not want that going green
and Hulk don't yeah I don't the chance
is small but it's big
enough so now when when squirrels go and
they they're not hibernating then they
just fill their layer with nuts and stay
in for the winner and eat is that the
deal or are they actually hibernating
too so the ones that everybody's seen in
their life the Tre squirrels big bushy
Tales um they don't hibernate you're
right they they C they're food caching
animals so instead of instead of turning
down demand they store away Supply
essentially winter so I can't sneak up
on them during winter and get them no
unfortunately not there goes that there
goes that theory the squirrel is
different from poking the bear yeah
that's very true so there's no
understanding biologically why
a an a hibernating mammal would have
more radiative resistance it's not clear
why that would be so evolutionarily is
that right that's a really great Point
there's there really seems to be no
reason evolutionarily why they would act
I shouldn't say actively but why that
trait might be selected for so it's
probably a passive consequence of some
other thing that they've been defending
against uh with the physiology of
hibernation or torper I should say so
sort of deadly becoming more protected
against radiation is how I describe
it wow all right so so where does this
go you're trying to help NASA at these
for Mars Mars missions where you it's
nine months there and nine months back
and and two years on planet Are there
specific missions they're tasking you to
think about so right now we're in the
phase conceptual phase of nyak there's
three phases conceptual phase two is
more you make the concept come to life
and phase three is sort of flight
Mission uh we're in the conceptual
design NASA has uh turned its attention
towards trying to figure out the hazards
of space because with the Mars missions
planned coming up they don't have really
a good answer for things like radiation
disuse atrophy lengthy stay in space
essentially and so they started to drive
down different ways to to mitigate this
and one of the ways that they've been
really interested in is hibernation and
so our unit what we're designing with
nyak right now is actually just the
ability for the first time in here
history to study hibernation in space
because we don't even know if
hibernation will work in space nobody's
even thought to send a hibernating
animal up and say does it happen are
there any primates that hibernate
because I'm thinking theoretically if
there are then that might be possible
for humans even culture to us in the
tree of life right rather than trying to
think about how we rework a bear or a
squirrel or whatever it might be or a
mouse there is one primate my
son that makes two primates then at
least um
oh there is okay there is there are so
fat sailed lemur from Madagascar they
will use torper quite quite well
actually um so there is a a more related
species to us that we that can use
hibernation is this during ski season in
Madagascar I mean when would they
drought drought is the big one for
Madagascar drought drought so during the
dry periods what chance is there that we
share part of
that code that will us as humans we
think actually a pretty good chance um
we we think so if you look
evolutionarily it seems that hibernation
is a pretty basil condition a pretty and
what I mean by basil is that it's pretty
far down in in the Tree of Life deep
started to cop it y so you wouldn't have
to Gan splice it you would just have to
Gene enable unlock it that's what we're
thinking unlock the gene interesting so
now how do do we know physiologically
how they cuz you know we without water
we die very quickly so uh what is
happening
physiologically are they storing water
do they do their cells just retain it I
mean what's going on do we know yeah we
we we have an idea yeah they they
machine in the back
yeah no one's ever been deep into a bear
cave to to to deny that story yeah
that's true that well actually I might
know somebody who has been um used to
know someone who did yeah used to that's
a good point
I mean specifically with the with the
Madagascar fat tail because they're
primates and so like I said we we die
very quickly without water so what's
going on with them yeah that that
unfortunately we don't know um okay it's
they're they're incredibly endangered
species so so more invasive studies on
them are just they just don't happen so
what we can do is whole whole animal
physiology or survival physiology but we
can't really tell so Lally what's going
on with the water and lers now we can
infer from other hibernating species and
we know that they're really good at
recycling the water that they do have so
there's a change in Ral function
essentially that allows them to recycle
a little bit better means they don't eat
they don't pee the whole time they don't
eat they don't drink they don't pee they
don't poop it's a complete shutdown of
metabolism wow and everything that comes
from it and so so what what what what
bodily system what brain system is is
controlling all of this because it can't
just be and that's it something's got to
still be going on to control this yeah
there's tissues that are still active so
so there are neural tissues that are
still active generally speaking the
cortex is quite quiescent so it's
there's not a lot going on in the cortex
the neural tissue that we see going on
is coming from either the brain well
both the brain stem and the hypothalamus
so brain stems controlling all heart
rate uh respiratory rate things like
that keeping your blood moving even
though it's moving more slowly and your
your lungs functioning um but obviously
with that there's muscles that do stay
active like the diaphragm some of the
upper respiratory muscles will stay
active um the hypothalamus I don't know
if you if you've read about this tissue
before it's basically one of the main
tissues controlling metabolism and body
temperature and so they are regulating
really tightly where their metabolism at
is at and where their body temperature
is at with the hypothalamus so that
tissue is are reading active as well and
that's actually in and of itself really
interesting because you have tissues
that are functioning in a mammal at 4
cels which is something that a human
couldn't do right now we couldn't bring
a human down to 4 Cs and ask the
tissues to continue to work you'd get
complete neuronal failure and so they've
they've developed or evolved these ways
to maintain tissue function despite it
being really cold man this sounds like
sci-fi it's so cool like it's that's
amazing yeah so can I can we get
quantitative here so my basil metabolism
so just keeping my body temperature for
24 hours I run through between 2200 and
2400 calories not for a man your size
well for me yeah nah yeah come on man
what are you saying you too big to be
living on those 2,000 calories get out I
didn't say 2,000 said 2400 20 222 around
there okay all right if you say so I
mean if that makes you
comfortable let me live in my own Li
when is's watching TV when he's watching
okay so if I'm in one of these hybrid
native States what does my calorie needs
drop to if you're in the hybrid native
state so it it depends
round numbers just call it 2000 so now
what it depends on what depth the
hibernation we achieve so if you're
total depth total the deepest deepest
depth you would be down in the tenths of
a calorie so it's about a nine per day
yes per day what from 2,000 down to less
than one calorie per day so the deepest
hibernators that we've seen they'll
they'll reduce metabolism by about 99% a
little bit more than 99% wow Dam that's
insane okay but that's still that wait I
want this so
bad I want this so badly and that and
that metabolism that's going it's only
at a POS just to be clear 99% drop on
2,000 calories is 20 calories oh okay
yeah you're right I'm bad at math I
suppose okay um not fraction I did but I
did say it's more than 99% it's it would
be in the in nearing the single digits
of calories is what you would expect
that is crazy yeah okay so to Chuck's
Point how can you induce a state of Tor
because you can't just say right lie
down there and don't think about
calories things have got to happen put
it out of your mind yeah just just
forget about it a meditation tape you're
halfway there and how how long do you
expect a human to be able to go in a
state of torper because you know you
talk about squirrel that did 9 months is
that viable for a human well to answer
your first question how do we get so
naturally there's a lot of circadian
rhythm that's associated with it so the
light cycles will kind of tell these
animals where they should be obviously
there's there's the facultative side of
it which is basically means as soon as
the food is taken away that tells them I
should go into hybernation so your pet
hamster you've ever heard the stories of
people walking in on their thought dead
hamster that's a facultative hibernator
so that trigger for them is the food's
gone away I must hibernate now so
they'll go into torper and so there's
different ways of doing it we we're
actually getting really good at over the
last 10 years we were getting really
good at taking animals that shouldn't be
in hibernation and putting them into
hibernation and so rats for example are
a prime example of this we we can go in
and we can change things in the
hypothalamus to make them drop
metabolism and drop body temperature to
look like it's in they're in torper you
take food away from a human they get
hangry they yeah very hangry yeah yeah
so you've got to over so you're gonna
have to possibly chemically induce this
yeah there's probably some chemical
induction that that will that will be
invol in that process yeah when you talk
about the Circadian rhythm of human
beings it's pretty
particular so you know you put somebody
to sleep for a couple months there's
going to be a huge adjustment period
when they come out of that I mean you
want to talk about being disoriented and
like and now they're up in space on top
of that it's a lot of stuff to throw
seems like a lot man people get really
hangry for Less that's true what we
learned though is that that circadian
clock in the hybrids it actually
continues to function in torper but more
slowly because the metabolism is slower
and so the same amount of time has
elapsed in the circadian clock despite
it being a month versus a day for
example and so that might help with that
disorientation we bring it back to Earth
just temporarily if a bear comes out of
torpa it has a reboot what if that
reboot doesn't quite work 100% yeah yeah
all the organ have to go back to 100%
when you're in space and you and a
human's going to come out and the reboot
doesn't
quite this is something that that the
movies don't get right it oh it's the
only thing that movies don't get right
yeah okay yeah the only thing everything
um know the other thing is we can't
freeze people that's that's that's gone
off the window a few few years ago it's
incredibly taxing to come out of
hibernation it's actually the most
physiologically demanding part of
hibernation I I would argue because
everything has to come online in the
correct
so the heart can't bump too fast before
the peripheral tissues are ready uh you
can't you can't inflate the lung too
much because it's still cold so you
could you could break alvu alike so
there there's and and so there's an
incredibly coordinated event of these
animals coming out of hibernation so
that process is actually quite slow uh
in in a rodent it could take as as long
as an hour or two to come out in a human
in a bear it's a little bit less because
their body temperature started a little
higher the metabolic rates a little high
they don't goes deep into hibernation
but it still takes time and it's
dangerous at the beginning of Austin
Powers where they brought him out of
deep freeze yeah and they thought him
out um he peed for like three
minutes at no point was that for comedic
effect I'm just saying we all pee like a
lot when you wake up in the morning and
this was obviously a an extension of
that so I'm still wondering how you pee
if you're not going to pee when you
hibernate you're going to you can have a
big ass pee when you wake up out of that
no think well maybe and and I know I
know from experience there's not a lot
of urine uh after the hibernation period
not not that I hibernated I I've seen it
in these animals
but Chucky slipped
up that's really going to have an effect
on the kidneys and the kidney function
yeah renal function is is quite quite uh
dramatically changed in hibernation but
but yeah the bladders aren't full uh at
the end of period they they don't
urinate and so it has a lot to do with
the recycling of that water but also the
reduction of metabolism so you're just
not using as much of that water as well
yeah you know in sleep you're still
quite metabolically active in sleep for
an animal that doesn't naturally
hibernate say a human coming out of
hibernation a
torper if it's not programmed naturally
to get it right it could go
cataclysmically wrong certainly could
yeah y oh what a right
s is the closest thing to toror for a
human being going into a coma and would
there be any benefit in sustaining us
the same way we sustain people who are
put into like a medically induced coma
or like yeah that's a great thought
actually I I would argue the closest
state to hibernation that that humans
achieve is actually sleep what we're
thinking is that hibernation is an
extension of sleep but I but I will I
will squash the the media uh mistake it
hibernation isn't sleep actually they
don't sleep in hibernation in fact it
seems that they come out of hibernation
to sleep but they're not sleeping when
they're in torper but everything
physiologically speaking in sleep is
very similar to hibernation except it's
just far deeper in hibernation but
you're exactly right I think I think
what human hibernation is going to look
like is some sort of uh assisted State
because we're not natural at it right
now and there's a lot of a lot of
hurdles that we'll have to overcome to
get to the where we can just induce
cybernation of a person and then have
them come out by themselves I think in
the meantime it will have to be some
sort of assisted state where we're
maintaining fluids or nutrient balance
at the right level um you know a whole
host of things really how close are we
to to this being
real that's a great question uh we don't
know I I you know it's certainly not a 5
years sort of thing that we can get
humans into hibernation um but you know
maybe are we looking in closer to 10 15
years I would say realistically are you
the first volunteer I would happily
actually there's a lab there's a lab
with some Massa funding as well trying
to extend the depth of metabolic
depression in humans or reduction in
humans I should say from sleep using
using chemicals and that's the closest I
think we are right now to getting humans
just into a more metabolically lowered
state so we're already starting to cross
that starting line I would say to
getting
closer to a metabolically lowered State
can we jump start that by gene therapy
jump start the entrance into like a
torpid State you mean yeah can we give
the upgrades to the areas that we we
because I'm on the team now um that you
know are really necessary for these
things to be in the right place and go
in the right
direction I think we're going to need to
do that um I just what we don't know yet
is exactly where to put those jumper
cables all right where's the right spot
to be making these changes to do it to
to go into a torpid State more reliably
we know the hypothalamus is going to be
important to this endeavor we know that
that changes there are going to be key
but we don't know exactly where in the
hypothalamus yet okay but there's a lot
of problems with it that come with just
depressing metabolism and lowering body
temperature things like that there's a
lot of problems that we'll have to solve
at the same time and what about because
we talked about the cast and the atrophy
so muscle atrophy even if we just sit
around so you know just the fact that
we're not exercising which is what our
bodies are kind of made to do so how do
you combat the muscle atrophy associated
with being asleep for a couple of months
yeah yeah that and that's that's one of
the big problems that we're going to
have to face and that that's why
studying hibernators natural hibernators
I think is going to be key to figuring
that question we don't know really what
we know is that it's a balance between
protein degradation and protein
synthesis that's really where where the
muscle tissue balance comes from it's
either you increase uh synthesis to
maintain tissue or you decrease
degradation and what we see in the
hibernators is they actually do a little
bit of boat in torper so they'll they'll
decrease their degradation Pathways and
they'll increase their synthesis
Pathways so actually making a little bit
of new muscle too in the hibernation
season and so what we have to figure out
from them is what is it that they're
doing to maintain both of those sort of
at a higher level and and the answer to
that is just we don't know you wouldn't
be able to use one of those like
electronic uh muscle stimulators that
you see advertised in the back of the
magazines like you know put this on
you'll have six-pack abs in three weeks
yeah Force muscle contraction um that's
probably not the way I would go I think
there's I think there's a more
sophisticated way of doing it but that's
more or less what like for example an
astronaut has to do is without the
electron stimulation they have to
basically weight train or resistance
train resistance yeah a lot of the time
that they're in in space is because they
have to sort of combat that that micro
gravity that's saying that's not giving
the muscle cues to stay full of tissue
they'll start to degrade all right this
is a question for Neil because you just
made me think of it I'm so I'm sorry
that I'm directing attention away but
you just said in space they weight train
so the weights don't have any weight in
or you know what I mean like they not
weight
Springs ah okay like the rubber bands
okay okay all right let's Le to a
positive future Ryan say you are able to
induce a state of torper we're in our
spacecraft we're going into planetary
what are the logistics that we will need
is it nice cozy bed are you going to be
slopping around an amnot
fluid what what do we need we need
oxygen we need to be consideration the
CO2 that we're
expelling hydration all these other
things what are the logistics that we
need to be coming to terms with yeah I
well I need a Temperpedic mattress okay
Ryan I'm just letting you know retrofit
the pods with a tempic mattress yeah
yeah I've liked watching movies in the
sense of there's a lot of creativity
with what they sort of make these pods
look like if you're weightless you won't
need a mattress what point yeah they
advertise we're used by M yes they do sp
and you only need it for the eight
minutes you're going into right and the
rest of the time you're weightless it
doesn't matter if there's a mattress
there at all that's true because the
depression that is from the takeoff and
that's it that's it yeah so what do they
sleep in in space space space
space no they have the little sleeping
bags that they slide in keeps them warm
yeah okay interrupt keeps them from
floating around no that's totally fine
yeah especially keeps you from around
into somebody else's well to that same
token I think I think someone in a
torpid like state in space is going to
need some sort of sequestering
environment so like a pod kind of like
what you would see in the movies and and
I would I would say yeah CO2 is probably
my main concern when it comes to
hibernation once you have that lowered
metabolic rate O2 becomes less of a
concern obviously you still need it but
you don't need as much but CO2 will
still eventually build up so you're
going to have to sequester CO2 away or
recycle it into O2 I think that humans
are going to need some sort of
supportive fluids and and the real
question is what what is the hibernation
going to look like because in natural
hibernation they don't just go into
torper and stay in torper they actually
go into torper and they periodically
spontaneously come out of torper for
about 24 hours and nobody has any idea
why and then they go back in and they
just repeat that cycle throughout the
entire hibernation season it's like us
waking up in the middle of the night
exactly what's the timeline on that that
cycle depending on the species so on the
on the on the most robust hibernators
like the 13 line ground squirrel they'll
stay in that torper period for about
20ish days
and then they'll arouse spontaneously go
into this what we call interbout arousal
and they'll stay in that between 12 and
24 hours and then they'll go back into
torper for that about 20 days and when
they come out of hibernation that's
actually when they sleep during the
hibernation season so they still it
seems that they still must sleep like
all other mammals so the sleeping which
we always heard about as a neurological
necessity what you're saying is
whatever's going on in hibernation does
not serve the body's needs that we get
from sleeping precisely interesting so
you still have to come out and sleep
maybe
the cycle of toror for humans might be a
little different where we're in toror
for 4 days and then we come out for
three days instead of being in for a
month and you know is is that figure our
formula might be different yeah our
formula I think our formula will
certainly be different and actually the
bear is a prime examp example of why our
formula be different Bears don't have
the INB Rosel and so there is some sleep
associated with their toror like State
and that's why we think it's more of
this Continuum from sleep to deep torper
is that bears sort of on the closer to
the Sleep side um where they don't need
these INB rles so they must be sleeping
in some fashion in their torper
hibernation season and so I I suspect
humans will fall on that side they'll be
look more like a bear do you participate
in the fat bear photo contest I don't
but I and I'm just hearing of this now
so I think I might have
to yeah every fall I think it is people
put they get you know who whoever's in
the wilderness they get the fattest bear
photo they possibly can yeah and there's
some fat ass bears oh they get really
big yeah they get oh my God all anost
tissue is what they're putting on too
it's all what all fat tissue that's what
they it's all fat so Ryan some point
you're going to want to test on a little
well say little furry creature and set
into space tell me it's last I saw your
chest hair you would count as a furry
creature yeah um yes however you're not
suggesting you send a big old bear up
into
space no I I mean in reality that would
be the most informative thing to put
into space would be the bear because I
think that's what human hibernation is
going to look like but I I I don't think
that's ever going to happen in the near
future you imagine it wakes up grumpy
yeah imagine dry
you know just to for reality check here
the only difference between a bear in a
cave and a bear in space is that a bear
in space is weightless unless the
spacecraft spins up and creates
artificial gravity If it creates
artificial gravity then the difference
between a bear in space and a bear in a
cave is zero there is no difference
other than like there's no salmon
Swimming by right so what are we
actually testing for is it just a zero g
effect yeah well well so z g and
radiation those are the two things that
you're really not getting on Earth that
you will be getting in space now this is
outside of low earth orbit obviously
yeah yeah there radiation again and just
for to be clear when you're in low earth
orbit you're still shielded by Earth's
magne field a lot of the high energy Ray
W if you're to go to anywhere other than
low earth orbit you have a radiation
dose that will matter to you and of
course if you're more radiatively
resistant in hibernation State then it
all works out so
maybe all of the radiatively resistant
hibernating animals came from
space in that line of thinking that
makes sense yeah the aliens brought them
and the ones that didn't survive the
radiative they died the ones that did
came to Earth there it is the and and
that's your next uh Pixar
movie but space animals here I'd watch
it I'd watch it just to see so Ryan we
got we got to call it quits there but
this has been a highly Illuminating
conversation I'm delighted to learn that
we got top people working on this uh
I've always been jealous of other
animals people say oh the human body is
some Perfection no it's not there's
plenty of other animals that have
features that I would Delight in yes
that we don't among them regenerating
limbs yeah hibernation sounds like fun
if you just want to chill for a couple
of months
so I'm glad to know we got good people
such as yourself and your three
leaders tackling these kinds of
biomedical challenges and applying them
to NASA this is all great to learn here
thank you so much for having me it's
been a a really great time talking to
all of you and hope hopefully it was a
fun conversation for everybody yeah
absolutely man G always good to have you
man thank you Neil always a pleasure my
friend all right Chucky baby you know it
Neil degrass Tyson here closing out yet
another edition of Star Talk special
edition this one on hibernating in space
as always I bid you to keep looking up
[Music]